National Museums of Berlin, German Staatliche Museen zu Berlin,  a network of state-run museums in Berlin, Ger., each specializing in a separate subject.
Taken together, the National Museums encompass centuries of acquisitions in various disciplines and rank among the world’s finest collections of art and artifacts. The collections in each museum are more or less distinctive, but as a group they cover both European and non-European art of all eras, archaeology, and ethnology. They are located in various neighbourhoods throughout the city. Although most of these museums have an international standing, the best known are a group of five museums situated on Museum Island in the city centre (Mitte district). These include the Old Museum (Altes Museum), the Bode Museum (Bode-Museum; formerly Kaiser Friedrich Museum), the New Museum (Neues Museum), the Old National Gallery (Alte Nationalgalerie), and the Pergamon Museum (Pergamonmuseum). This cluster of museums was designated a World Heritage site in 1999. Also located in the city centre are the nearby Friedrichswerder Church, the Hamburger Bahnhof (Tiergarten district), and the three museums of the Kulturforum Potsdamer Platz: a building housing the Museum of Decorative Arts (Kunstgewerbemuseum), the Picture Gallery (Gemäldegalerie), and the Museum of Prints and Drawings (Kupferstichkabinett), as well as the Art Library (Kunstbibliothek); the New National Gallery (Neues Nationalgalerie); and the Museum of Musical Instruments (Musikinstrumenten-Museum). Charlottenburg features the Berggruen Museum, the Scharf-Gerstenberg Collection, the Museum of Prehistory and Early History (Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte), the Replica Workshop (Gipsformerei), and the Museum of Photography (Museum für Fotografie). Dahlem museums include the Museum of Ethnological Art (Ethnologisches Museum), the Museum of Asian Art (Museum für Asiatische Kunst), and the Museum of European Cultures (Museum Europäischer Kulturen). Köpenick Palace contains another collection of decorative arts.