Tipperary, Irish Tiobraid Árann (“House of the Well of Ara”),  geographic county in the province of Munster, south-central Ireland, occupying a broad strip of country between the Rivers Shannon and Suir. It is bounded by Counties Offaly and Laoighis (north), Kilkenny (east), Waterford and Cork (south), and Limerick, Clare, and Galway (west). The geographic county is now divided administratively into a North and a South Riding (called North Tipperary and South Tipperary), with the county towns (seats) at Nenagh and Clonmel, respectively; each riding has a county manager.
Physically, the geographic county may be divided into five main areas, each aligned northeast-southwest, as follows:(1) To the east of Lough (Lake) Derg is a lowland, with Nenagh as its main town. An extension of the Irish central lowland, it has many medium-sized farms (50 acres [20 hectares]) that concentrate on raising stock for sale and some crops, mainly oats and potatoes. At the lower end of Lough Derg, the Arra Mountains rise to 1,517 feet (462 metres).(2) The second area is a mass of hills, extending from the Limerick border and including Keeper Hill (2,277 feet [694 metres]) and Silvermines Mountain (1,607 feet [490 metres]) and running northeastward to the Devilsbit (1,577 feet [481 metres]) and the Roscrea gap; the hill belt is 20 miles (30 km) wide in the south. There are some tiny villages in the farmed valleys, the agriculture of which is similar to that of the surrounding lowlands.(3) East of these uplands is a corridor 15 miles (25 km) wide through which runs the main railway between Dublin and Cork. There is a covering of glacial drift, and peat bogs appear between Cashel and Thurles in the Golden Vale and in the upper River Suir valley. Cattle production dominates the local economies. Dairying is prominent near Tipperary town.(4) The Slieveardagh ridge comprises a number of hills around Fethard and Cashel and extends northward to the Nore Valley. The region, which has some coal seams, is farmed extensively.(5) The extreme south of the county consists mainly of the middle Suir lowlands and those of its tributaries, the Rivers Tar and Anner. All this lowland is well farmed, with medium-sized and large farms; dairying is the main resource. Around this lowland are four ranges—of mountains, the Galtees, the Knockmealdown, the Comeraghs, and Slievenaman.