Sir A.J. Ayer, in full Sir Alfred Jules Ayer   (born October 29, 1910, London, England—died June 27, 1989, London) British philosopher and educator and a leading representative of logical positivism through his widely read work Language, Truth, and Logic (1936). Although Ayer’s views changed considerably after the 1930s, becoming more moderate and increasingly subtle, he remained loyal to empiricism, convinced that all knowledge of the world derives from sense experience and that nothing in experience justifies a belief in God or in any other extravagant metaphysical entity. His logical views alone, expressed in an elegant, crystalline prose, would have ensured him a place in the history of modern philosophy. But Ayer, playful and gregarious, was also a brilliant lecturer, a gifted teacher, and a successful broadcaster, as ready to offer his opinions on politics and sports as on logic and ethics. Named a fellow of the British Academy in 1952 and knighted in 1970, he became one of the most influential British philosophers of the 20th century.
Although Ayer was raised in London, both his father, a French Swiss businessman, and his mother, a Dutch citizen of Jewish ancestry, were born abroad, and Ayer grew up speaking French fluently. An extremely able, though sensitive, boy, he won a scholarship to Eton College (1923), where he excelled in classics but had no opportunity to study science, an omission that he would always regret. In 1929 he won a classics scholarship to the University of Oxford, where he also studied philosophy. His tutor, Gilbert Ryle (1900–76), soon described Ayer as “the best student I have yet been taught by.” While at Eton, Ayer had read essays by Bertrand Russell (1872–1970), one of which, “On the Value of Scepticism” (1928), proposed a “wildly paradoxical and subversive” doctrine that Ayer would adopt as a lifelong philosophical motto: “It is undesirable to believe a proposition when there is no ground whatever for supposing it true.” At Oxford, Ayer studied A Treatise of Human Nature (1739) by the radical empiricist David Hume (1711–76) and discovered the recently published Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) by Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951). Instinctively irreverential, he used both works to attack the conventionally religious, socially conservative figures who then dominated philosophy at Oxford.