Fax, in full facsimile, also called telefax,  in telecommunications, the transmission and reproduction of documents by wire or radio wave. Common fax machines are designed to scan printed textual and graphic material and then transmit the information through the telephone network to similar machines, where facsimiles are reproduced close to the form of the original documents. Fax machines, because of their low cost and their reliability, speed, and simplicity of operation, revolutionized business and personal correspondence. They virtually replaced telegraphic services, and they also present an alternative to government-run postal services and private couriers.
Most office and home fax machines conform to the Group 3 standard, which was adopted in 1980 in order to ensure the compatibility of digital machines operating through public telephone systems worldwide. As a standard letter-size sheet is fed through a machine, it is scanned repeatedly across its width by a charge-coupled device (CCD), a solid-state scanner that has 1,728 photosensors in a single row. Each photosensor in turn generates a low or high variation in voltage, depending on whether the scanned spot is black or white. Since there normally are 4 scan lines per mm (100 scan lines per inch), the scanning of a single sheet can generate almost two million variations in voltage. The high/low variations are converted to a stream of binary digits, or bits, and the bit stream is subjected to a source encoder, which reduces or “compresses” the number of bits required to represent long runs of white or black spots. The encoded bit stream can then be modulated onto an analog carrier wave by a voice-band modem and transmitted through the telephone network. With source encoding, the number of bits required to represent a typewritten sheet can be reduced from two million to less than 400,000. As a result, at standard fax modem speeds (up to 56,000 bits per second, though usually less) a single page can be transmitted in as little as 15 seconds.