Fritz Lang,  (born December 5, 1890, Vienna, Austria-Hungary—died August 2, 1976, Los Angeles, California, U.S.) Austrian-born American motion-picture director whose films, dealing with fate and man’s inevitable working out of his destiny, are considered masterpieces of visual composition and expressionistic suspense. Lang had already created an impressive body of work in the German cinema before coming to the United States in 1934. Although it took him some 21 years to fashion 22 Hollywood films, arguably at least half of them are noirish masterpieces of menace—tone poems of fear and fate that have stood the test of time.
Lang’s father was a Baumeister (designer-contractor) and, as such, did not quite enjoy the status of an architect, which Lang later claimed was his father’s occupation. His mother, who may well have converted from Judaism to Roman Catholicism in response to growing anti-Semitism in Austria, raised her children in the Roman Catholic faith. Lang briefly studied civil engineering in Vienna but soon became enamoured of café life and painting (especially the works of Egon Schiele and Gustav Klimt). For several years he traveled in North Africa, Asia, and the South Seas and throughout Europe, studying painting in Munich and Paris. An exhibition of his paintings opened in Paris in 1914, just before he returned to Austria and was conscripted into the Austrian army for service in World War I. He was wounded four times (losing vision in his right eye), ultimately requiring a year’s convalescence in a Vienna army hospital, where he tried his hand at writing screenplays. After his discharge he began acting on the Vienna stage. In Berlin he wrote screenplays for producer Joe May, and in 1919 he was given the opportunity to write and direct his first movie, Halbblut (The Half-Caste), the theme of which foreshadowed such triumphs from his Hollywood period as The Woman in the Window (1944) and Scarlet Street (1945). In 1920 he began working for producer Erich Pommer at Decla Biscop Studio, which became part of the German filmmaking giant UFA.