Oder River, Polish and Czech Odra,  river of east-central Europe. It is one of the most significant rivers in the catchment basin of the Baltic Sea, second only to the Vistula in discharge and length. For the first 70 miles (112 kilometres) from its source, it passes through the Czech Republic. For a distance of 116 miles in its middle reach, it constitutes the boundary between Poland and Germany before reaching the Baltic Sea via a lagoon north of the Polish city of Szczecin. The river is an important waterway, navigable throughout most of its length. It forms a link, by way of the Gliwice Canal, between the great industrialized areas of Silesia (Śląsk), in southwestern Poland, and the trade routes of the Baltic Sea and beyond. The Oder is connected with the Vistula, Poland’s largest river, by means of a water route utilizing the Warta and Noteć rivers, together with the Bydgoszcz Canal, and is tied in with the waterway system of western Europe by way of the Oder–Spree and Oder–Havel canals in eastern Germany.
The total length of the Oder River is 531 miles (854 kilometres), 461 miles of which lie in Poland. The total watershed area has been calculated at 46,000 square miles (119,000 square kilometres), of which about 90 percent is in Polish territory. The mean elevation of the Oder basin is 535 feet (163 metres) above sea level. From the river’s source and over the greater part of its course, the Oder flows in a generally southeast–northwest direction; only from the junction with the Neisse (Polish: Nysa Łużycka) River does the northward trend toward the Baltic commence. The principal left-bank tributaries are the Opava of the Czech Republic and the Osobłoga, Nysa Kłodzka, Oława, Ślęza, Bystrzyca, Kaczawa, Bóbr, and Neisse of Poland; from the east the main tributaries are the Olše of the Czech Republic and the Kłodnica, Mała Panew, Strobrawa, Widawa, Barycz, Obrzyca, Warta, Myśla, and Ina of Poland. From the junction with the Opava, the Oder is navigable for a distance of some 475 miles for 220 to 230 days of the year. Towns of particular importance along the Oder are Ostrava in the Czech Republic, Frankfurt in Germany, and Racibórz, Opole, Brzeg, Wrocław, Nowa Sól, and Szczecin in Poland.