Urban ecosystem, any ecological system located within a city or other densely settled area or, in a broader sense, the greater ecological system that makes up an entire metropolitan area. The largest urban ecosystems are currently concentrated in Europe, India, Japan, eastern China, South America, and the United States, primarily on coasts with harbours, along rivers, and at intersections of transportation routes. Large urban areas have been features of the industrialized countries of Europe and North America since the 19th century. Today, however, the greatest urban growth occurs in Africa, South and East Asia, and Latin America, and the majority of megacities (that is, those with more than 10 million inhabitants) will be found there by 2030.
Urban ecosystems, like all ecosystems, are composed of biological components (plants, animals, and other forms of life) and physical components (soil, water, air, climate, and topography). In all ecosystems these components interact with one another within a specified area. In the case of urban ecosystems, however, the biological complex also includes human populations, their demographic characteristics, their institutional structures, and the social and economic tools they employ. The physical complex includes buildings, transportation networks, modified surfaces (e.g., parking lots, roofs, and landscaping), and the environmental alterations resulting from human decision making. The physical components of urban ecosystems also include energy use and the import, transformation, and export of materials. Such energy and material transformations involve not only beneficial products (such as transportation and housing) but also pollution, wastes, and excess heat. Urban ecosystems are often warmer than other ecosystems that surround them, have less infiltration of rainwater into the local soil, and show higher rates and amounts of surface runoff after rain and storms. Heavy metals, calcium dust, particulates, and human-made organic compounds (e.g., fertilizers, pesticides, and contaminants from pharmaceutical and personal care products) are also concentrated in cities.