Texas A&amp;M University, state university system based in College Station, Texas, U.S., formed in 1948 as an outgrowth of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, which was established in 1871 and opened in 1876. The system includes campuses at Commerce (founded 1889), Kingsville (1925), Corpus Christi (founded 1947), Galveston (1962, administered as a branch of the College Station campus), and Texarkana (1971), as well as Prairie View A&amp;M University (1876), Tarleton State University (1899) in Stephenville, Texas A&amp;M International University (1969) in Laredo, and West Texas A&amp;M University (1909) in Canyon. Tarleton State’s Central Texas branch is in Killeen; the Kingsville campus operates a system centre at Palo Alto College in San Antonio. The Texas A&amp;M System Health Science Center, formed in 1999, comprises five institutions in three cities: the College of Medicine, the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, and the School of Rural Public Health (College Station); the Institute of Biosciences and Technology (Houston); and Baylor College of Dentistry (Dallas). There is also an academic centre in Castiglion Fiorentino, Italy. In earlier periods, the Texas A&amp;M University System also included Arlington State College (now University of Texas at Arlington) and James Connally Technical Institute (now Texas State Technical College Waco).
The main campus at College Station is one of the largest in the nation, with an area of about 5,200 acres (2,100 hectares). It comprises 10 colleges with fields of study including agriculture, architecture, geosciences, engineering, and public service. A range of undergraduate and graduate degrees and professional degrees in medicine and veterinary medicine are offered. The Galveston branch contains the marine and maritime campus of the university as well as the Texas Maritime Academy and the Texas Institute of Oceanography. Texas A&amp;M is a land-grant, sea-grant, and space-grant university known for its programs in engineering, technology, and agriculture. (Sea-grant and space-grant colleges and universities, like land-grant institutions, obtain federal funding for college research, education, and public service projects related to sea and space.) A major research university, Texas A&amp;M supports institutes for the study of biotechnology, race and ethnicity, nautical archaeology, petroleum, nuclear science, and transportation, among other areas. The George Bush Presidential Library and Museum, commemorating the 41st U.S. president, is on the College Station campus. Enrollment at College Station is approximately 44,500 students; more than 90,000 are enrolled in the system as a whole.