Cornell University, coeducational institution of higher education in Ithaca, New York, U.S., one of the Ivy League schools. Cornell is situated on a 745-acre (301-hectare) campus occupying hills that command a wide view of Cayuga Lake (one of the Finger Lakes) and the surrounding farm, conservation, and recreation land. Founded as the land-grant university of New York state under the Morrill Act of 1862, it was also privately endowed by Ezra Cornell, a founder of the Western Union Telegraph Company. Cornell established the school’s financial foundations, and diplomat and scholar Andrew Dickson White established its form. A charter was granted in 1865, and the university opened in 1868 with White as its first president. Nonsectarian from the beginning, it offered a much broader curriculum than was common for the day and set out to embrace any investigation and instruction deemed useful. Cornell was the first American university to be divided into colleges offering different degrees, and it was among the first Eastern universities to admit women (1870).
The study of agriculture early attracted students to Cornell and continues to account for much of the enrollment, though the university also graduates many students in the biological sciences, business management, engineering, and the social sciences. Cornell University consists of a number of colleges, schools, and graduate schools, most of which are privately supported. The largest of these is the College of Arts and Sciences, which concentrates on the liberal arts. Other four-year private institutions offer instruction in architecture, art, and planning; engineering; and hotel administration. Privately supported professional and graduate schools include those for law, business management, and medicine. Cornell also operates four state-supported colleges in Ithaca that are part of the State University of New York system; these schools specialize in agriculture and life sciences, human ecology, industrial and labour relations, and veterinary medicine. Cornell University Medical College is part of a complex of medical teaching and research institutions in New York City, including New York Hospital and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Noteworthy among the university’s special programs is rural sociology, which reflects the school’s history of service to the community. Total enrollment in the university is approximately 19,500.