W.C. Fields, original name William Claude Dukenfield  (born January 29, 1880, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.—died  December 25, 1946, Pasadena, California) actor whose flawless timing and humorous cantankerousness made him one of America’s greatest comedians. His real-life and screen personalities were often indistinguishable, and he is remembered for his distinctive nasal voice, his antisocial character, and his fondness for alcohol.
Owing to a preponderance of fabricated studio publicity, as well as Fields’s own penchant for lying about his past, most biographies of Fields are inaccurate. He did not, as has been widely reported, run away from home at age 11 after dropping a heavy wooden box on his father’s head. Rather, he left home at age 18 after many years of practicing his craft as a juggler, and he was a headline star in vaudeville by age 21. He toured the world extensively with his comedy juggling act, playing the world’s most prestigious venues, including the Folies Bergère in Paris. He added verbal humour to his act shortly after joining the Ziegfeld Follies in 1915; he starred in annual Follies productions until 1921 and made occasional return appearances until 1925. Fields became one of Broadway’s top stars when his performance in the musical comedy Poppy (1923) garnered raves from critics. In the play, he established one of his two basic comic personas, that of the grandiose fraud who flouts the conventional virtues of hard work and honesty. In his next play, the less successful The Comic Supplement (1924), he played the second of his oft-repeated types, the beleaguered husband. Fields also dabbled in film acting during his early years, making his screen debut in the short subject Pool Sharks (1915). He starred in several mediocre silent features during the 1920s that demonstrated how crucial sound was to Fields’s screen success. He had given up on a screen career by the end of the decade and was back on stage in 1928 as the star of Earl Carroll’s Vanities, Broadway’s highest-paid performer at a salary of $5,000 per week.