California State University, extensive system of public institutions of higher education in California, U.S., one of the largest such systems in the country. It has campuses at Bakersfield, Channel Islands (at Camarillo), Chico, Dominguez Hills (at Carson), East Bay, Fresno, Fullerton, Long Beach, Los Angeles, Monterey Bay (at Seaside), Northridge, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Marcos, and Stanislaus (at Turlock) as well as the individually named Humboldt State University (at Arcata), San Diego State University, San Francisco State University, San Jose State University, Sonoma State University (at Rohnert Park), California Polytechnic State University (at San Luis Obispo), California State Polytechnic University (at Pomona), and California Maritime Academy (at Vallejo). All schools in the system are coeducational and combine to offer more than 1,800 bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in some 240 subjects. Doctoral degrees in several disciplines are available through joint programs with other educational institutions. Total enrollment for the system is approximately 400,000.
California State University was formed in 1960 by the Donahoe Higher Education Act, which unified existing state colleges under a central administrative structure. The oldest school in the system is San Jose State University; established in 1857 as a normal school, it was the state’s first public institution of higher learning. The newest addition is the Channel Islands campus, which opened for classes as a separate institution in 2002 after having been part of the Northridge campus. The system is overseen by a chancellor, who is at the administrative offices in Long Beach, and by presidents at each university. Its campuses operate research facilities that reflect the regional resources and industry. For example, Humboldt State, located near the Pacific Ocean and northern California forests, has a herbarium and a wildlife sanctuary, and several campuses in southern California operate a desert-studies centre. Among the alumni are novelist Amy Tan (San Jose State), politician Willie Brown and writer and politician Pierre Salinger (San Francisco State), and baseball player Joe Morgan (East Bay).