Grouper, any of numerous species of large-mouthed heavy-bodied fishes of the family Serranidae (order Perciformes), many belonging to the genera Epinephelus and Mycteroperca. Groupers are widely distributed in warm seas and are often dully coloured in greens or browns, but a number are brighter, more boldly patterned fishes. Some, such as the Nassau grouper (Epinephelus striatus), are noted for their ability to change from one to any of a number of other colour patterns. Also, in many species, such as the black and yellowfin groupers (Mycteroperca bonaci and M. venenosa, respectively), individuals inhabiting deeper waters are much redder than those living near shore. Groupers are protogynous hermaphrodites; that is, they first function as females and later transform into males. They are prime food fishes and also provide sport for anglers and spearfishers. A few grouper species, however, may carry toxic substances produced by dinoflagellates that bioaccumulate in their flesh (increase in concentration at the higher end of afood chain) and can cause ciguatera, a rarely fatal form of poisoning, when consumed.
One of the largest and best-known of the groupers is the goliath grouper (E. itajara), which can reach a length of 2.5 metres (8.2 feet) and a weight of about 455 kg (1,000 pounds). The black, or Warsaw, grouper (E. nigritus, also classified as Hyporthodus nigritus), of the Atlantic, is another large species. Adult black groupers can grow to 2.3 metres (7.5 feet) in length and weigh nearly 200 kg (440 pounds). Grayish or brownish in colour, it is the only grouper with 10 dorsal spines. Other well-known species include the golden-striped grouper (Grammistes sexlineatus), an Indo-Pacific fish about 25 cm (10 inches) long, marked with rows of dashes when young but black or brown with lengthwise yellow stripes as an adult; the Nassau grouper, an abundant Caribbean food fish about 90 cm (35 inches) long, varying in colour from white, with or without darker markings, to dark brown or gray-brown; the red grouper (E. morio), another Caribbean food fish, usually reddish with pale blotches and up to 125 cm (about 49 inches) long; and the rock hind (E. adscensionis), an Atlantic food species spotted with orange or red and up to 61 cm (24 inches) long.