Dogsled racing, also called sled dog racing,  sport of racing sleds pulled by dogs, usually over snow-covered cross-country courses. In warmer climates, wheeled carts are substituted for the sleds. Dogsledding was developed from a principal Eskimo method of transportation. The gold rushes in Alaska and the Yukon Territory (now Yukon) at the turn of the 20th century brought greater global attention to sled dogs, which were used at that time for freight hauling and mail delivery, as well as by fur trappers to travel between their traps. At first dogs were individually tethered to the sled in a fan hitch. This was ideal in open country, but, as the use of sled dogs expanded, the tandem hitch, for running dogs in pairs, became the standard. Sled dogs are still used for transportation and working purposes in some Arctic and subarctic areas, though they have largely been replaced by aircraft and snowmobiles. Most dog teams today are kept for recreation or racing rather than for working.
The modern lightweight racing sled is generally flexible and light, weighing 20 to 30 pounds (9 to 13.5 kg). Most sleds are made of ash lashed together with leather or nylon, though a trend is developing toward the use of composite materials. Most racing sleds are of two types, a toboggan style or a stanchion-supported basket style. Both rest on two runners made from plastic, wood, or metal. A 3- to 4.5-foot (1- to 1.5-metre) tugline attaches each dog’s harness to the gangline, the main line that runs back to the sled. A section of gangline for each dog or pair of dogs running side by side is about 8 feet (2.5 metres) long. A 10- to 14-inch (25.5- to 36-cm) long neckline attaches the dog’s collar to the gangline to keep it in position. Lines are generally made from polyethylene or polypropylene rope, but any strong lightweight rope can be used. Some lines incorporate aircraft cable or chain so the dogs cannot chew through them. The driver, called a musher, can use a foot brake that digs into the snow with claws to slow the team and a pronged metal claw, called a snow hook, to temporarily keep a team stationary.