Proverb, succinct and pithy saying in general use, expressing commonly held ideas and beliefs. Proverbs are part of every spoken language and are related to such other forms of folk literature as riddles and fables that have originated in oral tradition. Comparisons of proverbs found in various parts of the world show that the same kernel of wisdom may be gleaned under different cultural conditions and languages. The biblical proverb “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,” for example, has an equivalent among the Nandi of East Africa: “A goat’s hide buys a goat’s hide, and a gourd, a gourd.” Both form part of codes of behaviour and exemplify the proverb’s use for the transmission of tribal wisdom and rules of conduct. Often, the same proverb may be found in many variants. In Europe this may result from the international currency of Latin proverbs in the Middle Ages. The proverb known in English as “A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush” originated in medieval Latin, and variants of it are found in Romanian, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, German, and Icelandic. Many biblical proverbs have parallels in ancient Greece. “A soft answer turneth away wrath” was known to Aeschylus as well as to Solomon, and “Physician, heal thyself” (Luke 4:23) was also known to the Greeks.
Certain stylistic similarities have been found in proverbs from the same part of the world. Middle Eastern proverbs, for instance, make frequent use of hyperbole and colourful pictorial forms of expression. Typical is the proverbial Egyptian description of a lucky man: “Fling him in the Nile and he will come up with a fish in his mouth.” Classical Latin proverbs are typically pithy and terse (e.g., Praemonitus, praemunitis; “forewarned is forearmed”). Many languages use rhyme, alliteration, and wordplay in their proverbs, as in the Scots “Many a mickle makes a muckle” (“Many small things make one big thing”). Folk proverbs are commonly illustrated with homely imagery—household objects, farm animals and pets, and the events of daily life.