Zhengzhou, Wade-Giles romanization Cheng-chou, formerly (1913–49) Zhengxian,  city and capital of Henan sheng (province), China. Located in the north-central part of the province, it is situated to the south of the Huang He (Yellow River) where its valley broadens into the great plain and at the eastern extremity of the Xiong’er Mountains. The city is at the crossing point of the north-south route skirting the Taihang Mountains and the mountains of western Henan and the east-west route along the southern bank of the Huang He. Zhengzhou, the provincial capital of Henan since 1954, forms a prefecture-level shi (municipality).
Since 1950, archaeological finds have shown that there were Neolithic settlements in the area and that the Shang Bronze Age culture, which flourished there from about 1500 bce, was centred on a walled city. Outside this city, in addition to remains of large public buildings, a complex of small settlements has been discovered. The site is generally identified with the Shang capital of Ao. The Shang, who continually moved their capital, left Ao, perhaps in the 13th century bce. The site, nevertheless, remained occupied; Zhou (post-1050 bce) tombs have also been discovered. Traditionally it is held that in the Western Zhou period (1111–771 bce) it became the fief of a family named Guan. From this derives the name borne by the county since the late 6th century bce—Guancheng (“City of the Guan”). The city first became the seat of a prefectural administration in 587 ce, when it was named Guanzhou. In 605 it was first called Zhengzhou—a name by which it has been known virtually ever since. It achieved its greatest importance under the Sui (581–618 ce), Tang (618–907), and early Song (960–1127) dynasties, when it was the terminus of the New Bian Canal, which joined the Huang He to the northwest. There, at a place called Heyin, a vast granary complex was established to supply the capitals at Luoyang and Chang’an (present-day Xi’an) to the west and the frontier armies to the north. In the Song period, however, the transfer of the capital eastward to Kaifeng robbed Zhengzhou of much of its importance.