Huguenot, any of the Protestants in France in the 16th and 17th centuries, many of whom suffered severe persecution for their faith. The origin of the name is uncertain, but it appears to have come from the word aignos, derived from the German Eidgenossen (confederates bound together by oath), which used to describe, between 1520 and 1524, the patriots of Geneva hostile to the duke of Savoy. The spelling Huguenot may have been influenced by the personal name Hugues, “Hugh”; a leader of the Geneva movement was one Besançon Hugues (d. 1532).
After the Protestant Reformation began in Germany (1517), the reform movement spread quickly in France, especially in places that had suffered economic depression and among those who had grievances against the established order of government. The French Protestants soon experienced persecution, however, and the first French martyr, Jean Vallière, was burned at the stake in Paris in August 1523. Despite persecution, however, the movement progressed; but measures against it were redoubled after the “Affair of the Placards” (October 1534), when posters attacking the mass were found on walls throughout Paris and even on the door of King Francis I’s bedroom at Amboise. Thereafter the number of Protestant refugees from persecution increased. Many went to Strassburg (Strasbourg), then a free city of the Holy Roman Empire, where Martin Bucer had organized a Reformed church. The most famous of these exiles was John Calvin, who left for Basel in the autumn of 1534. At Basel he is thought to have written his Institutes of the Christian Religion, which was prefaced by a letter to Francis I pleading the cause of the Reformers in France. In 1538 Calvin visited Strassburg on Bucer’s invitation and organized the French community there. The first Huguenot community in French territory, that of Meaux, was founded in 1546 on the model of the Strassburg community. The Huguenot church in Paris was founded about 1555, and in spite of persecution the Reformers increased in numbers.