Johann Winckelmann,  (born Dec. 9, 1717, Stendal, Prussia—died  June 8, 1768, Trieste) German archaeologist and art historian whose writings directed popular taste toward classical art, particularly that of ancient Greece, and influenced not only Western painting and sculpture but also literature and even philosophy.
Winckelmann was the son of a cobbler. His formative years were deeply influenced by the study of Greek, particularly of Homer, whom he first read in Alexander Pope’s English translation. Later he studied theology at the University of Halle (1738) and medicine at the University of Jena (1741–42). But it was not until 1748, as librarian to Count von Bünau at Nöthnitz near Dresden, that he came into contact with the world of Greek art. There he wrote the formative essay, Gedanken über die Nachahmung der griechischen Werke in der Malerei und Bildhauerkunst (1755; Reflections on the Painting and Sculpture of the Greeks, 1765), in which he maintained, “The only way for us to become great, or even inimitable if possible, is to imitate the Greeks.” His essay became a manifesto of the Greek ideal in education and art and was soon translated into several languages. Under the influence of the Saxon court, he embraced the Catholic faith; and, entering the service of the future cardinal Achinto, he exchanged his homeland for the city of Rome, second only to Paris as a cultural centre. There he rose to the position of librarian of the Vatican, president of Antiquities, and, later, secretary to Cardinal Albani, who had one of the great private collections of classical art. Winckelmann’s position and influential patronage gave him access to the art treasures of Rome and the freedom to develop his talents as art critic and consultant to visitors from among the European nobility. His works were widely read and earned him the respect of the intellectual world of the day, including, somewhat later, the poet Goethe, who said,Winckelmann is like Columbus, not yet having discovered the new world but inspired by a premonition of what is to come. One learns nothing new when reading his work, but one becomes a new man!