Improvised explosive device (IED), a homemade bomb, constructed from military or nonmilitary components, that is frequently employed by guerrillas, insurgents, and other nonstate actors as a crude but effective weapon against a conventional military force. When used as roadside bombs, IEDs can interdict lines of communication, disrupt traffic, and damage or destroy targeted vehicles. Sometimes entryways or entire structures are booby-trapped with IEDs to kill or injure anyone (such as a squad of soldiers) entering the premises. Larger vehicle-borne IEDs (car or truck bombs) have been used to destroy entire installations, such as the barracks of U.S. marines and French paratroopers in the Beirut barracks bombings of 1983. IEDs have been the predominant weapon of insurgents in the Iraq War and the Afghanistan War, and, because of their low cost, ease of employment, and high effectiveness, they will continue to be the weapon of choice for guerrillas and insurgents for the foreseeable future.
In principle, all IEDs consist of an initiating mechanism, a detonator, an explosive charge, and a casing or collection of projectiles (such as ball bearings or nails) that produces lethal fragments upon detonation. In practice, IEDs can be made of many different kinds of objects and materials, including artillery or mortar rounds, aerial bombs, certain types of fertilizers, TNT, and other explosives. IEDs can also contain radiological, chemical, or biological components to increase their lethal and psychological effects. IEDs aimed at killing or injuring personnel can be as crude as pipe bombs (a metal pipe packed with explosive material and sealed at both ends), though they are often more-complex. Vehicle-borne IEDs aimed at destroying buildings can contain large quantities of explosives to enhance their destructive capacity. IEDs aimed at destroying vehicles can be quite sophisticated, especially if the target is armoured. For example, some IEDs have shaped-charge warheads that upon detonation create streams of molten metal that can penetrate armour. In Iraq some Shīʿite militia groups used explosively formed projectiles (EFPs)—an extremely lethal form of shaped charge supplied by Iran—to destroy even the most heavily armoured vehicles, such as M1 Abrams tanks.