Sepik River, formerly Kaiserin Augusta ,  one of the largest rivers on the island of New Guinea, southwestern Pacific Ocean. It rises in the Victor Emanuel Range of the central highlands of Papua New Guinea, near Telefomin. The Sepik flows northwestward (crossing just over the border into the Indonesian portion of the island) and then, turning east, follows the great Central Depression, receiving numerous tributaries draining from the Bewani and Torricelli mountains (north) and the Central Range (south) before entering the Bismarck Sea through a delta about 700 miles (1,100 km) from its source. It drains an area of some 30,000 square miles (77,700 square km). For most of its lower course the river meanders through a wilderness of sago and nipa palm swamp and lagoons with large floating islands of vegetation drifting in the channel. The amount of sediment carried down this channel is so great that the waters of the ocean are discoloured for 20 miles (32 km) beyond the mouth, which is more than 1 mile (1.6 km) wide. The river is navigable for more than 300 miles (480 km) by vessels drawing 13 feet (4 metres) of water or less, and by canoe for some 550 miles (900 km).
There are no settlements of great size along the Sepik; Angoram is the largest, and the entire lower basin is sparsely populated. The isolation of the river’s small tribal groups, including the Arapesh, Iatmul, and Biwat (Mundugumor), from external influences has given rise to one of the most original and extensive artistic traditions in Oceania. Characterized by the term Sepik River style, the ornamentation of household and cult objects, weapons, musical instruments, houses (high-gabled with decorated house posts), and canoe prows is highly developed. Masks and sculpture are characterized by a “hooked,” or “beaked,” style, with an elongation of the nose, and there is also a tradition of modeling faces in clay on human skulls. These arts are most fully developed in the lower reaches of the river and in adjacent areas of the lower Ramu River.