Medal, piece of metal struck with a design to commemorate a person, place, or event. Medals can be of various sizes and shapes, ranging from large medallions to small plaques, or plaquettes. Most medals are made of gold, silver, bronze, or lead, the precious metals being used for the finer productions. Medals are produced by a variety of techniques: they are cast from a model of wax, wood, or sometimes stone; they are struck from a die engraved in intaglio, the design impressed on the metal by pressure; or they can be produced by the repoussé process, in which two separately worked, interlocking molds containing the blank are brought together under pressure. A positive punch, or hub, can be cut in hard metal and the design stamped into a softer metal, which is then hardened to form a die (thus, many dies can be made from one hub). Machine cutters, introduced in the 19th century, copied mechanically an enlarged electrotype of the original design; but this technique, by eliminating hand cutting, took away much of the medalist’s work.
It is generally accepted that the modern commemorative medal, in both form and content, was invented by the Italian painter Antonio Pisano (c. 1395–1455), called Pisanello. His first medal portrayed the Byzantine emperor John VIII Palaeologus and was made in 1438–39. His medals provided a portable portrait relief of the sitters, reproducible by casting in lead or bronze and small enough to be held in the hand. He placed a profile portrait on the obverse and an allegorical or pictorial scene on the reverse. This formula for the medal has lasted to the present day. Pisanello made medals of 16 sitters for the courts of Ferrara, Mantua, Milan, Naples, and Rimini. Major schools of medal making developed, particularly in Mantua, Florence, the Veneto, and Rome. The papal court had no local school but attracted medalists from all over Italy. Toward the end of the century the portrait effigy became bolder and more sculptural in the work of Niccolò Fiorentino and Sperandio of Mantua.