Boris I, also called Saint Tsar Boris I or Saint Tsar Boris Mikhail I, baptismal name Mikhail, or English Michael  (died May 2 [May 15, New Style], 907, Preslav [now Veliki Preslav], Bulgaria; feast day May 2 [May 15]) khan of Bulgaria (852–889), whose long reign witnessed the conversion of the Bulgarians to Christianity, the founding of an autocephalous Bulgarian church, and the advent of Slavonic literature and establishment of the first centres of Slav-Bulgarian scholarship and education. Boris’s active domestic and foreign diplomacy was of great importance in the formation of a united Bulgarian ethnic community, and it left lasting traces on Bulgaria’s subsequent development.
When Boris inherited the throne from his father, Bulgaria’s territorial, military, and political potential had made it one of the largest states in Europe. Bulgaria’s approximate frontiers were the Dnieper River in the northeast, the Carpathian Mountains in the north, the Tisza (Tisa) River in the northwest, the Adriatic Sea in the west, and the Tomorr (Tomor), Belasica, Pirin, Rhodope, and Strandzha mountains in the south. Many Slavic tribes lived within the boundaries of the state, together with the proto-Bulgarians, a tribe of Turkic origin that had settled in the Balkan Peninsula at the end of the 7th century. In view of the religious, ethnic, and language difficulties between the Slavs and the Bulgars, the introduction of a common and compulsory religion for all subjects was one of the principal preconditions for the formation of a united Bulgaria. Pagan Bulgaria needed to join the “family of Christian states,” but the existence of two competing centres of Christianity—Rome and Constantinople—made it difficult for Boris to make his choice. Boris originally intended to accept Roman Christianity, but an unsuccessful war with the Byzantines forced him to adopt the Orthodox faith of Constantinople (864). Boris (at his baptism he took the Christian name Michael), his family, and the nobles who supported his policy were baptized one night in secret by a Byzantine bishop and priests who had been sent to Pliska, the Bulgarian capital. There was serious opposition by both the nobility and the common people to Boris’s attempt to enforce mass baptism. A pagan rebellion broke out, and Boris retaliated by executing 52 boyars, together with their families.