Graphical user interface (GUI), a computer program that enables a person to communicate with a computer through the use of symbols, visual metaphors, and pointing devices. Best known for its implementation in Apple Inc.’s Macintosh and Microsoft Corporation’s Windows operating system, the GUI has replaced the arcane and difficult textual interfaces of earlier computing with a relatively intuitive system that has made computer operation not only easier to learn but more pleasant and natural. The GUI is now the standard computer interface, and its components have themselves become unmistakable cultural artifacts.
There was no one inventor of the GUI; it evolved with the help of a series of innovators, each improving on a predecessor’s work. The first theorist was Vannevar Bush, director of the U.S. Office of Scientific Research and Development, who in an influential essay, “As We May Think,” published in the July 1945 issue of The Atlantic Monthly, envisioned how future information gatherers would use a computer-like device, which he called a “memex,” outfitted with buttons and levers that could access vast amounts of linked data—an idea that anticipated hyperlinking. Bush’s essay enchanted Douglas Engelbart, a young naval technician, who embarked on a lifelong quest to realize some of those ideas. While at the Stanford Research Institute (now known as SRI International), working on a U.S. Department of Defense grant, Engelbart formed the Augmentation Research Center. By the mid-1960s it had devised a set of innovations, including a way of segmenting the monitor screen so that it appeared to be a viewpoint into a document. (The use of multiple tiles, or windows, on the screen could easily accommodate different documents, something that Bush thought crucial.) Engelbart’s team also invented a pointing device known as a “mouse,” then a palm-sized wooden block on wheels whose movement controlled a cursor on the computer screen. These innovations allowed information to be manipulated in a more flexible, natural manner than the prevalent method of typing one of a limited set of commands.