Vanderbilt University, private, coeducational institution of higher education in Nashville, Tennessee, U.S. Baccalaureate degrees are awarded through the College of Arts and Science, School of Engineering, Peabody College (education and human development), and Blair School of Music. About 40 master’s, 40 doctoral, and several professional degree programs are offered through these schools and through the Graduate School, Law School, Divinity School, Owen Graduate School of Management, and schools of Medicine and Nursing. The Jean and Alexander Heard Library is a library system that contains more than two million volumes; the university also has an extensive television news archive of broadcasts dating to 1968. Vanderbilt is a comprehensive research university, the programs of its medical school being especially well-known nationally. Notable work is also conducted at the John F. Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development, the Robert Penn Warren Center for the Humanities, the Vanderbilt Institute for Public Policy Studies, and Arthur J. Dyer Observatory, among other centres. Student enrollment is about 10,000.
The university was chartered in 1872 as Central University by the Southern branch of the Methodist Episcopal church. When shipping and railroad magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt donated $1,000,000 in 1873, the school was founded as Vanderbilt University, and classes began two years later. Initially, the university was divided into departments of academics, Bible, law, and medicine; preparatory classes were offered through 1887. The first doctorate was granted in 1879, and an engineering department was formed in 1886. The Methodists retained control of the university until 1914. The Graduate School was founded in 1935. In 1979 Vanderbilt acquired George Peabody College for Teachers, which originated in 1785 as Davidson Academy and developed into a leading teacher-training school. The Blair School of Music, founded in 1964, became a part of the university in 1981.