The Most Noble Order of the Garter, English order of knighthood founded by King Edward III in 1348, ranked as the highest British civil and military honour obtainable. Because the earliest records of the order were destroyed by fire, it is difficult for historians to be certain of its original purposes, the significance of its emblem, and the origin of the order’s motto. One theory is that Edward III wished to revive the Round Table of Arthurian legend. The order was established to commemorate an incident in which Edward was dancing when one of his partner’s blue garters dropped to the floor. As bystanders snickered, Edward gallantly picked up the garter and put it on his own leg, admonishing the courtiers in French with the phrase that remains the order’s motto, “Honi soit qui mal y pense” (“Shame to him who thinks evil of it,” popularly rendered as “Evil to him who evil thinks”). The king inaugurated the Order of the Garter with a great feast and joust, but the identity of the lady thus granted immortality is uncertain. The most popular candidate is Joan, “Fair Maid of Kent,” the king’s cousin, but Katharine Grandison, Countess of Salisbury, has a strong claim, and one Tudor historian named the lady as the queen, Philippa of Hainault.
As one of the most distinguished and exclusive orders of knighthood, (there is only one rank, that of Knight Companion), the order’s roll has contained many illustrious names. Nonetheless, members have fallen from honour and forfeited their rank. Thirty-six knights of the Garter have been beheaded, with Henry VIII alone accounting for six. During World War II, the crests and swords of the “extra knights” Emperor Hirohito of Japan and King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy were removed from the order’s chapel. The conferment of the honour has even been refused. In 1945, when his party was voted out of office, Winston Churchill refused the honour when it was first offered to him, explaining in private, “I can hardly accept the Order of the Garter from the king after the people have given me the Order of the Boot.” Churchill relented, however, and was inducted into the order in 1953.