Fort Sumter National Monument, historic site preserving Fort Sumter, location of the first engagement of the American Civil War (April 12, 1861). The fort is situated on a man-made island at the entrance to the harbour of Charleston, South Carolina, U.S. Construction of the fort, named for the American Revolutionary War general Thomas Sumter, began in 1829 and was still in progress in 1861. The national monument, established in 1948, also includes Fort Moultrie National Monument and covers 196 acres (79 hectares). Located on nearby Sullivan’s Island, Fort Moultrie was the site of an American victory against the British (June 28, 1776) in the American Revolution, when the fort was called Fort Sullivan; it was later renamed for William Moultrie, the fort’s commanding officer at the time of the battle. The Seminole Indian leader Osceola is buried there.
By early 1861 the seven Southern states that had already seceded from the Union claimed possession of all U.S. forts and arsenals within their territory. Only two forts remained under federal jurisdiction: Fort Pickens, Florida, and Fort Sumter, which was garrisoned by U.S. troops under Major Robert Anderson. Sumter was of no strategic value to the Union; it was incomplete and its 60 guns pointed out to sea, but it assumed critical value as a symbol of national union. When President Abraham Lincoln took office in March, he was faced with the Confederate demand for evacuation of the fort, which was threatened by other fortifications erected by South Carolina in the harbour area. Lincoln had either to attempt resupplying the fort, then in danger of being starved out, or to abandon it and accede to disunion. The president determined to prepare relief expeditions to both forts, but, before the arrival of supplies, Confederate authorities demanded Fort Sumter’s immediate evacuation. When this was refused, the South’s batteries opened fire at 4:27 am on April 12, and Anderson was forced to surrender after 34 hours of shelling. On April 14 Fort Sumter was evacuated by federal troops, who marched out waving the American flag to a gun salute; on the 50th round of a 100-gun salute, an explosion occurred, causing the only death of the engagement. The shelling of U.S. property aroused and united the North. During the war the Confederates manning the fort withstood almost constant bombardment from July 1863 to February 1865. The fort itself was largely reduced to rubble.