University of Alaska, system of public land-, sea-, and space-grant universities in Alaska, U.S., with campuses (regional university centres) in Fairbanks (main campus), Anchorage, and Juneau (known as the University of Alaska Southeast). The university traces its origins to 1917, two years after the U.S. Congress set aside land for the creation of a college in Alaska. Instruction at what was then the Alaska Agricultural College and School of Mines began in 1922, and the university, situated in Fairbanks, was renamed the University of Alaska in 1935. In 1959 the Fairbanks campus was the site of Alaska’s constitutional convention and signing. The University of Alaska system was created in 1975 when the Anchorage and Juneau campuses were consolidated. Each regional university centre includes several community-based (mostly two-year) branch colleges. All campuses are coeducational and offer bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in several areas. The Fairbanks campus has doctorate programs in subjects uniquely suited to Alaska, including atmospheric sciences, fisheries, geology, geophysics, marine biology, oceanography, and space physics, as well as more standard subjects such as anthropology and mathematics. Total enrollment in the statewide system exceeds 30,000.
The Fairbanks campus remains the major focus of the university, and it administers and coordinates programs throughout the system. Its College of Rural Alaska oversees several branch campuses including Bristol Bay (Dillingham), Chukchi (Kotzebue), Kuskokwim (Bethel), Northwest (Nome), and Interior-Aleutians and Tanana Valley (Fairbanks). Among the notable research institutes associated with the University of Alaska Fairbanks are the Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station, the Geophysical Institute, the Institute of Marine Science, the Institute of Arctic Biology, and the International Arctic Research Center (1997; a U.S.-Japanese collaboration). The cultural and natural history collections of the University of Alaska Museum of the North, located on the campus, contain more than a million objects.