Lee Ufan, Korean Lee Woo-Hwan  (born June 24, 1936, Haman, South Kyŏngsang [Gyeongsang] province, Korea [now in South Korea]) Korean artist, critic, philosopher, and poet who was a prominent theorist and proponent of the Tokyo-based movement of young artists from the late 1960s through the early ’70s known as Mono-ha (Japanese: “School of Things”). Lee built a body of artistic achievement across a wide range of mediums—painting, printmaking, sculpture, installation art, and art criticism—and had a major impact on the development of South Korean art in the 1970s. In the late 1980s he began receiving international recognition through exhibitions in Europe and elsewhere around the world. His artistic reputation was strengthened even more in the 1990s with Mono-ha’s resurgent popularity in Europe and Japan. In June 2011 he became the third East Asian artist to be given a solo exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum in New York City. The exhibition confirmed his position as a leading figure in the contemporary art world.
Lee was born and raised in a traditional hanok (Confucian-style home), and from childhood he was trained in traditional scholarly pursuits, including poetry, calligraphy, and painting. In his youth he was much engaged with reading and literature, with his father’s encouragement, and aspired to becoming an author. His stronger interest in art, however, led him to study painting at Seoul National University’s College of Fine Arts. In 1956 he interrupted his studies to visit relatives in Japan and stayed on there. In 1958 he enrolled in the philosophy department at Nihon University in Tokyo, where he studied the work of Western thinkers such as Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty as well as Japanese philosopher Nishida Kitarō. After graduating in 1961 he again turned to art, preferring visual representation to words as a means of expressing his ideas. During this period Lee painted and began making sculptures that used natural and industrial materials such as stone, steel, rubber, and glass.