Seine River, river of France, after the Loire its longest. It rises 18 miles (30 kilometres) northwest of Dijon and flows in a northwesterly direction through Paris before emptying into the English Channel at Le Havre. The river is 485 miles (780 kilometres) long and with its tributaries drains an area of about 30,400 square miles (78,700 square kilometres). It is one of Europe’s great historic rivers, and its drainage network carries most of the French inland waterway traffic. Since the early Middle Ages it has been above all the river of Paris, and the mutual interdependence of the river and the city that was established at its major crossing points has been indissolubly forged. The fertile centre of its basin in the Île-de-France was the cradle of the French monarchy and the nucleus of the expanding nation-state and is still its heartland and metropolitan region.
The Seine rises at 1,545 feet (471 metres) above sea level on the Mont Tasselot in the Côte d’Or region of Burgundy but is still only a small stream when it traverses porous limestone country beyond Châtillon. Flowing northwest from Burgundy, it enters Champagne above Troyes and traverses the dry chalk plateau of Champagne in a well-defined trench. Joined by the Aube near Romilly, the river bears west to skirt the Île-de-France in a wide valley to Montereau, where it receives the Yonne on its left bank. This tributary is exceptional in rising beyond the sedimentary rocks of the Paris Basin on the impermeable crystalline highland of the Morvan, a northward extension of the Massif Central. Turning northwest again, the Seine passes Melun and Corbeil as its trenched valley crosses the Île-de-France toward Paris. As it enters Paris, it is joined by its great tributary the Marne on the right, and, after traversing the metropolis, it receives the Oise, also on the right. In its passage through Paris, the river has been trained and narrowed between riverside quays. Flowing sluggishly in sweeping loops, the Seine passes below Mantes-la-Jolie across Normandy toward its estuary in the English Channel. The broad estuary opens rapidly and extends for 16 miles below Tancarville to Le Havre; it experiences the phenomenon of the tidal bore, which is known as the mascaret, although continued dredging since 1867 has deepened the river so that the mascaret has gradually diminished.