Agaricales, order of fungi in the class Agaricomycetes (phylum Basidiomycota, kingdom Fungi). Traditionally, agarics were classified based on the presence of gills (thin sheets of spore-bearing cells, or basidia) and mushroom-shaped fruiting bodies. Today, agarics are classified based on genetic relatedness, and thus they may or may not have gills, and fruiting bodies may or may not be mushroom-shaped. The best known family, Agaricaceae, has basidia located on gills. The familiar commercially grown mushroom is a representative example: its fruiting structure (the mushroom proper) typically consists of a stalk (stipe) and a cap (pileus), which bears the gills on its underside. Best known of the agarics is the genus Agaricus, with more than 200 species (see mushroom). The most prominent of the agarics are the edible meadow or field mushroom A. campestris and the common cultivated mushroom A. bisporus. The family Pluteaceae (Amanitaceae) contains many species that are poisonous (see Amanita).
Among the remaining families, the following members are of interest. Clitocybe is a cosmopolitan genus and contains the poisonous C. illudens, the jack-o-lantern, which glows in the dark. This orange-yellow fungus of woods and stumps resembles the sought after edible species of Cantharellus, the chanterelle; the similarity emphasizes the need for careful identification by the mushroom gatherer. Russula has about 750 species, many with caps of red, orange, yellow, or green. Lactarius has milky (hence the name) or bluish juice; the genus contains the edible L. deliciosus as well as several poisonous species. Coprinus, the ink caps, characteristically grow in clumps at the sides of roads and at the base of old stumps. They are characterized by bullet-shaped caps, black spores (which make the gills appear black), and their habit of liquefying when mature, leaving an inky mass. The majority are edible, a few are somewhat poisonous, and some are mildly toxic only when alcoholic beverages are consumed with the mushrooms.