Daniel Cowan Jackling,  (born Aug. 14, 1869, Appleton City, Mo., U.S.—died March 13, 1956, San Francisco, Calif.) American mining engineer and metallurgist who developed methods for profitable exploitation of low-grade porphyry copper ores and thus revolutionized copper mining. In particular, Jackling opened the famed Bingham Canyon copper mine in Utah.
Jackling typifies America’s favourite story—that of a poor boy who becomes an industrial giant. Orphaned at age two, he spent most of his boyhood on farms, going from one relative to another. In September 1889 he entered the Missouri School of Mines at Rolla, where he finished the four-year course in three years. He continued at the school for another year as assistant professor of chemistry and metallurgy. From there he worked at various mining camps as miner, assayer, mill hand, and metallurgist, eventually arriving at Mercur, Utah, where he became construction and metallurgical superintendent of the Golden Gate Mill. The operators of the mill asked him, together with Robert C. Gemmell, to make an examination of property in Bingham Canyon near Salt Lake City, Utah, that they had under option. The Jackling-Gemmell report, dated Sept. 18, 1898, is notable in that it marks the first comprehensive proposal for the volume mining and treatment of ore containing as little as 2 percent copper. The overburden (waste) was to be stripped with steam shovels, loaded into railroad cars, and hauled to adjacent canyons for dumping. The ore was also to be mined by steam shovels, loaded into railroad cars, and transported to a concentrating plant at Garfield, Utah. Jackling and Gemmell calculated that copper could be produced for six cents a pound. The option holders, however, turned down the property, claiming the ore was too low-grade. Jackling’s faith in the property and his persistence were rewarded in 1903 when financing for the mine was forthcoming. Construction of a 6,000-ton-per-day mill was begun in 1906, and the Utah Copper Company was formed in 1910. In 1936 the Kennecott Copper Corporation acquired the Utah Copper Company. The Bingham Canyon mine is still in operation as one of the largest open-pit mining operations in the world.