Rhodes, Modern Greek Ródos, also spelled Ródhos ,  major city of the island of Rhodes (Modern Greek: Ródos) and capital of the nomós (department) of Dhodhekánisos (in the Dodecanese [Dodekánisa] islands), Greece. The largest urban centre on the island, Rhodes sits on its northeasternmost tip. In Classical history, Rhodes was a maritime power and the site of the Colossus of Rhodes. Because of its influence on Mediterranean history as well as its preservation of Gothic and Ottoman structures, the city was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1988.
The historical fortunes of the city are linked intimately with those of the island of Rhodes. Under a modified democracy and an efficient executive, the city in antiquity prospered. Its standard of coinage was widely accepted, and its maritime law, the earliest known to have been codified, was widely quoted in the Mediterranean and was adopted by Augustus for the Roman Empire. Parts of the law are still quoted. About 294–282 bce the citizens commemorated their successful resistance to a determined siege by Demetrius I Poliorcetes (305 bce) by erecting the famous Colossus of Rhodes, a bronze statue rising to some 100 feet (30 metres) or higher that was dedicated to the sun god Helios. About 226/225 bce the statue toppled during a severe earthquake that destroyed much of the island. It was not reerected because of a pronouncement by the Delphic oracle, but it was immortalized as one of the Seven Wonders of the World. Under the emperor Diocletian (reigned 284–305 ce) the city was the capital of a Roman province. From the 16th to the 20th century Rhodes was controlled by the Ottoman Turks. A devastating powder magazine explosion ruined much of the town in 1856, killing hundreds of its citizens. Under Italian rule (1912–43) it was the administrative centre for the Dodecanese islands. The Germans occupied the island from 1943 to 1945, during which time several historic structures were damaged by Allied bombing. Rhodes and the other Dodecanese islands were subsequently returned to Greek sovereignty.