Maine, constituent state of the United States of America. The largest of the six New England states in area, it lies at the northeastern corner of the country. Its total area, including about 2,300 square miles (6,000 square km) of inland water, represents nearly half of the total area of New England. Maine is bounded to the northwest and northeast by the Canadian provinces of Quebec and New Brunswick, respectively, and to the west by New Hampshire. The famed rocky coastline of the state is angled from southwest to northeast along the Atlantic Ocean. Maine was admitted to the union on March 15, 1820, as the 23rd state; its capital is Augusta. The Algonquian-speaking peoples inhabiting the region called it “Land of the Frozen Ground,” and there are two theories of the derivation of the state’s English name: that it was named for the former French province of Maine and that it was so named for being the “mainland,” as opposed to the coastal islands.
Maine is the most sparsely populated state east of the Mississippi River. More than four-fifths of its total land area is under forest cover. By most statistical measures Maine is an economically depressed state, yet the rugged beauty and challenge of its climate and landscape and the character of its people have given Maine an importance beyond its economic and political power. Limited economic growth has contributed to the preservation of much of its natural appearance. Since 1970, however, one-third of the state’s southern coastal counties have recorded accelerating growth rates, increased residential and commercial construction, and increased revenues. Maine’s economy has become increasingly dependent on services, while the traditional industry, the manufacture of paper and paper products, has declined. Fishing, forestry, mining, and agriculture comprise the second most important sector. The state thus epitomizes the increasingly difficult national choices between preservation of environmental quality and potential economic expansion. Area 35,380 square miles (91,634 square km). Population (2010) 1,328,361; (2015 est.) 1,329,328.