Yukon River, major North American river that flows through the central Yukon territory of northwestern Canada and the central region of the U.S. state of Alaska. It measures 1,980 miles (3,190 km) from the headwaters of the McNeil River (a tributary of the Nisutlin River). The Yukon discharges into the Bering Sea after flowing northwestward and then generally southwestward through a low plateau that slopes down across Alaska. The main east- and north-bank tributaries are the Teslin, Big Salmon, Pelly, Stewart, Klondike, Porcupine, and Koyukuk; the west- and south-bank tributaries are the Takhini, White, and Tanana. Its headwater tributaries drain an area of about 328,000 square miles (850,000 square km) out of a surrounding semicircle of high mountains. This huge area—larger than Turkey—was occupied solely by North American Indians until the mid-19th century, when peoples of European descent (including explorers from the eastward-expanding Russian Empire) began to move into the region, first as fur traders and then in search of mineral wealth. The discovery of gold on the Klondike in 1896 precipitated an influx of settlement that created an international mythology of romantic frontier existence associated with the name Yukon.
The McNeil headwaters rise in the Pelly Mountains of south-central Yukon territory and flow south into Teslin Lake and thence into the Teslin River. The main headwaters of the Yukon River, however, flow from Atlin Lake and Tagish Lake in the vicinity of the border between British Columbia and the Yukon territory. About 50 miles (80 km) downstream the Yukon once rushed through the rocky walls of narrow Miles Canyon and tumbled over rock ledges at Whitehorse Rapids. These obstacles to river travel during the gold rush era necessitated the construction of the short railroad from Skagway, Alaska, to Whitehorse in the Yukon territory, the latter becoming the southern terminal of water transport northward. The river has since been dammed south of Whitehorse for hydroelectric power; the rapids are buried under the reservoir lake, and deep water fills the former canyon.