Photovoltaic effect, process in which two dissimilar materials in close contact produce an electrical voltage when struck by light or other radiant energy. Light striking crystals such as silicon or germanium, in which electrons are usually not free to move from atom to atom within the crystal, provides the energy needed to free some electrons from their bound condition. Free electrons cross the junction between two dissimilar crystals more easily in one direction than in the other, giving one side of the junction a negative charge and, therefore, a negative voltage with respect to the other side, just as one electrode of a battery has a negative voltage with respect to the other. The photovoltaic effect can continue to provide voltage and current as long as light continues to fall on the two materials. This current can be used to measure the brightness of the incident light or as a source of power in an electrical circuit, as in a solar power system (see solar cell).
The photovoltaic effect in a solar cell can be illustrated with an analogy to a child at a slide. Initially, both the electron and the child are in their respective “ground states.” Next, the electron is lifted up to its excited state by consuming energy received from the incoming light, just as the child is lifted up to an “excited state” at the top of the slide by consuming chemical energy stored in his body. In both cases there is now energy available in the excited state that can be expended. In the absence of junction-forming materials, there is no incentive for excited, free electrons to move along a specific direction; they eventually fall back to the ground state. On the other hand, whenever two different materials are placed in contact, an electric field is generated along the contact. This is the so-called built-in field, and it exerts a force on free electrons, effectively “tilting” the electron states and forcing the excited free electrons into an external electrical load where their excess energy can be dissipated. The external load can be a simple resistor, or it can be any of a myriad of electrical or electronic devices ranging from motors to radios. Correspondingly, the child moves to the slide because of his desire for excitement. It is on the slide that the child dissipates his excess energy. Finally, when the excess energy is expended, both the electron and the child are back in the ground state, where they can begin the whole process over again. The motion of the electron, like that of the child, is in one direction. In short, the photovoltaic effect produces a direct current (DC)—one that flows constantly in only a single direction. See also photoelectric effect.