Niccolò Piccinni,  (born Jan. 16, 1728, Bari, Kingdom of Naples—died  May 7, 1800, Passy, Fr.) one of the outstanding opera composers of the Neapolitan school, who wrote in both the comic and the serious styles but who, in the century following his death, was chiefly remembered as the rival of Gluck. He studied in Naples, where he produced several operas. The masterpiece of his early years was the opera buffa La buona figliuola, or La cecchina (1760), on a libretto by Goldoni based on Richardson’s novel Pamela. It was written in the new style, later epitomized in the operas of Mozart, that incorporated serious or sentimental subject matter into the flexible musical style of the older, farcical, opera buffa.
In 1776 he was invited to Paris by supporters of the Italian operatic style, who opposed the opera reforms of Gluck. Piccinni was thus drawn into a continuation of the earlier controversy between supporters of Italian opera and supporters of French opera, the “Querelle des Bouffons” (“Quarrel of the Buffoons”). Although Piccinni admired Gluck’s operas and steadfastly refused to encourage his own partisans, the warring factions nevertheless created a rivalry. Each composer’s work was compared unfavourably with that of the other, although their aims were quite dissimilar: Piccinni maintained the traditional sequence of arias and recitatives, whereas Gluck was laying the foundations of an operatic reform. At the height of the controversy, both composers were commissioned to write operas on the subject Iphigénie en Tauride. Gluck’s famous opera was performed in 1779, Piccinni’s in 1781 (though he had been promised that it would precede Gluck’s). After Gluck’s departure from Paris in 1779, Piccinni continued to produce operas but was deprived of his post at the École Royale de Musique in 1789, during the Revolution. He then returned to Naples, where he was unjustly placed under house arrest for four years for supposed Jacobin leanings. He returned to Paris again in 1798, but his wish to resume working was frustrated first by continued political difficulties and then by ill health.