Saskatchewan, province of Canada, one of the Prairie Provinces. It is one of only two Canadian provinces without a saltwater coast, and it is the only province whose boundaries are all wholly artificial (i.e., not formed by natural features). It lies between the 49th and 60th parallels of latitude, it is bounded on the west by longitude 110° west of Greenwich, and its eastern limit, with minor adjustments, is longitude 102° W. Its southern half is largely an extension of the Great Plains of central North America, rarely rising 2,000 feet (610 metres) above sea level. It measures 760 miles (1,223 km) from south to north, tapering from a width of 393 miles (632 km), where it abuts Montana and North Dakota in the United States, to 277 miles (446 km), where it meets the Northwest Territories. Saskatchewan is Canada’s fifth largest province in area and sixth in population. Saskatchewan’s landscape makes its inhabitants conscious of the sky, and the changing patterns of light and shadow on clouds, which commonly offer magnificent sunrises and sunsets, are as much a part of the scenery as any contour of the earth. Economically, the province has always been heavily dependent on the exportation of its agricultural and mineral products and is thus peculiarly sensitive to fluctuations in world markets beyond its own or even Canada’s control. Area 251,367 square miles (651,036 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,033,381.
The most important division of the land in Saskatchewan is between the northern one-third of the province, which is part of the Canadian Shield, and the plains, which cover the southern two-thirds. The Canadian Shield is an area of mostly igneous and metamorphic rocks of Precambrian age (about 540 million to 4 billion years old); hence, it is often referred to as the Precambrian Shield. The plains comprise a wedge-shaped succession of sedimentary rocks, the oldest of which abut the shield margin while the youngest occur in the Cypress Hills in the southwestern portion of the province. The highest elevations in Saskatchewan are also found in the Cypress Hills, peaking at 4,567 feet (1,392 metres) above sea level. These hills—the only part of Saskatchewan that escaped glaciation—contain unique plant and animal life. The lowest point in the province, 699 feet (213 metres), is in the extreme northwest.