Anna Akhmatova, pseudonym of Anna Andreyevna Gorenko   (born June 11 [June 23, New Style], 1889, Bolshoy Fontan, near Odessa, Ukraine, Russian Empire—died March 5, 1966, Domodedovo, near Moscow, Russia, U.S.S.R.) Russian poet recognized at her death as the greatest woman poet in Russian literature.
Akhmatova began writing verse at age 11 and at 21 joined a group of St. Petersburg poets, the Acmeists, whose leader, Nikolay Gumilyov, she married in 1910. They soon traveled to Paris, immersing themselves for months in its cultural life. Their son, Lev, was born in 1912, but their marriage did not last (they divorced in 1918). The Acmeists, who included notably Osip Mandelshtam, were associated with the new St. Petersburg journal Apollon (1909–17; “Apollo”) and such poets of the older generation as Innokenty Annensky and Mikhail Kuzmin, who stood apart from the dominant Symbolist poets of the day. Partly in response to the manifestos of the Russian Futurists (1912–13), the young poets founded Acmeism, a school that affirmed “beautiful clarity” (Kuzmin’s term) in place of the vagueness and abstractness of Russian Symbolism. Codifying their own poetic practice, Acmeists demanded concrete representation and precise form and meaning—combined with a broad-ranging erudition (Classical antiquity, European history and culture, including art and religion). To these Akhmatova added her own stamp of elegant colloquialism and the psychological sophistication of a young cosmopolitan woman, fully in control of the subtle verbal and gestural vocabulary of modern intimacies and romance. A small detail could evoke a whole gamut of emotions (“You are drawing on my soul like a drink through a straw”). Her first collections, Vecher (1912; “Evening”) and Chyotki (1914; “Rosary”), especially the latter, brought her fame and made her poetic voice emblematic of the experience of her generation. Her appeal stemmed from the artistic and emotional integrity of her poetic voice as well as from her poetic persona, further amplified by her own striking appearance. Akhmatova’s principal motif is frustrated and tragic love expressed with an intensely feminine accent and inflection entirely her own.