Custer State Park, varied region of prairies and rugged mountains in the Black Hills of southwestern South Dakota, U.S. With an area of 114 square miles (295 square km), it is among the largest state parks in the continental United States. Located about 20 miles (30 km) south of Rapid City and headquartered in Custer, it is bordered to the north and west by Black Hills National Forest and to the south by Wind Cave National Park. It was named for George Armstrong Custer, who led an expedition that discovered gold along French Creek in 1874. The park was designated a game preserve in 1913 and was made a state park in 1919, primarily through the work of Governor Peter Norbeck.
Custer State Park is known for its free-ranging bison herd. With some 1,500 animals, it is one of the largest bison herds in the world. Pronghorn, deer, elk, mountain goats, bighorn sheep, mountain lions, burros, prairie dogs, coyotes, eagles, and wild turkeys are other residents of the park’s variety of habitats. The 18-mile (29-km) Wildlife Loop Road offers views of the animals, and bison often stop traffic as they cross. The Needles Highway is a twisting 14-mile (23-km) route through narrow tunnels and past needlelike rock formations, including the Needles Eye, a granite spire some 30 to 40 feet (9 to 12 metres) high with a small slit 3 to 4 feet (0.9 to 1.2 metres) wide. The park offers hiking, biking, rock climbing, and horseback riding and has several resorts. Several hiking trails in the park lead to Harney Peak, which rises to 7,242 feet (2,207 metres) and is the highest point in North America east of the Rocky Mountains. The Black Hills Playhouse, affiliated with the University of South Dakota, presents theatrical productions during the summer. The annual Buffalo Roundup, held at the beginning of October, manages the bison population by herding the animals into corrals, where a number are chosen for sale at auction. Nearby are Badlands National Park, Buffalo Gap National Grassland, Jewel Cave National Monument, Mount Rushmore National Memorial, and Crazy Horse Memorial.