Inclusive fitness, theory in evolutionary biology in which an organism’s genetic success is believed to be derived from cooperation and altruistic behaviour. Inclusive fitness theory suggests that altruism among organisms who share a given percentage of genes enables those genes to be passed on to subsequent generations. In this way, an altruistic act that supports the survival of a relative or other individual theoretically enhances the genetic fitness of both the recipient of the act and the altruistic organism. The propagation of shared genes was believed to be an underlying mechanism for the evolution of eusociality (cooperative behaviour characterized by division of labour and group integration that is found in certain species of animals, mainly social insects).
The idea of inclusive fitness was first proposed in 1932 by British geneticist J.B.S. Haldane in The Causes of Evolution. The theory was later named and developed by British evolutionary biologist William Donald Hamilton, who used inclusive fitness to explain direct (reproductive) and indirect (aided by a relative or a colony member) inheritance of genetic traits associated with altruism. Hamilton presented his inclusive fitness theory in 1963; the following year British evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith coined the term kin selection to describe Hamilton’s theory. Inclusive fitness later came to be understood as forming a general basis for kin selection theory, which attempts to interpret altruistic social behaviour in animals through genetic relatedness and benefits and costs associated with altruistic acts. Thus, in contrast to inclusive fitness, which considers genetic traits in both related and unrelated individuals, kin selection is concerned only with relatives. Hamilton’s inclusive fitness theory, as well as kin selection, seemed to many biologists to reconcile the conflict between natural selection, in which “selfish” genes perpetuate their own fitness through survival of the fittest, and selfless behaviour, in which eusocial genes shared by relatives and colony members influence cooperative behaviours that encourage the propagation of those genes.