Cardiff, Welsh Caerdydd,  city and capital of Wales. Cardiff exists as both a city and a county within the Welsh unitary authority system of local government. It is located within the historic county of Glamorgan (Morgannwg) on the Bristol Channel at the mouth of the River Taff, about 150 miles (240 km) west of London. The origins of its name are a point of debate but are widely believed to have come from an English corruption of the original Welsh title Caer-Taff (Fort on the Taff).
The Romans built a small fort there in the 1st century ce, where the Gloucester-Carmarthen road crossed the Taff, altering it several times before creating the present stone-enclosed site. The town began its continuous existence with the arrival of the Normans in the 11th century. The Norman landowner Robert FitzHamon built a fortification within the remains of the Roman fort, possibly as early as 1081. Cardiff Castle became the base of the lords of Glamorgan, governing the county on behalf of the English crown for the next 450 years. By 1150 a stone shell keep (a masonry replacement for a wooden palisade crowning the motte) was erected on the mound—one of the finest surviving examples of its type in the country. Outside the castle a small walled town grew up, and it benefited from the trading privileges which went with its status as a staple port, granted through a series of charters by either the local lord or the crown (e.g., 1608, from James I). Cardiff acted as a market centre and small port for the coastal plain nearby. The castle and lordship came into the possession of Richard III, Henry VII, and finally Henry VIII, who never visited Cardiff and who abolished the post in 1536. In 1550, however, Edward VI created a new title, lord of Cardiff and keeper of Cardiff Castle, and granted it to the Herbert family of South Wales, from whom it passed by marriage in 1776 to the earl (marquess since 1796) of Bute. The Bute family greatly influenced the subsequent development of Cardiff. They renovated the turreted castle as a residence, with spectacular mock medieval towers and spires added in the late 19th century by architect William Burges, and sold land adjoining it for the creation of a Civic Centre in the early 20th century. Cardiff Castle itself and its attached extensive parkland were given to the city of Cardiff in 1947.