Michael Curtiz, original name Mihály Kertész, also called Michael Courtice  (born December 24, 1888, Budapest, Hungary—died April 10, 1962, Hollywood, California, U.S.) Hungarian-born American motion-picture director whose prolific output as a contract director for Warner Brothers was composed of many solid but run-of-the-mill genre films along with a string of motion picture classics that included Angels with Dirty Faces (1938), Casablanca (1942), and Mildred Pierce (1945), as well as a series of adventure films that starred frequent collaborator Errol Flynn, most notably Captain Blood (1935), The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936), The Adventures of Robin Hood (1938), and The Sea Hawk (1940).
Little is known for certain about Curtiz’s early life because he left no autobiography, he was seldom interviewed, and, when he did talk about himself, he frequently gave contradictory accounts. Nevertheless, it seems likely that he grew up in an upper middle-class Jewish family in Budapest and that his mother was a concert singer (his father’s occupation is less clear). Curtiz may have joined a traveling circus for a brief period during his teens before attending university and then studying acting at Budapest’s Royal Academy of Theatre and Art. After making his stage debut in Budapest in 1910, he acted in and may have directed stage plays before starring in (and perhaps directing) the first feature film released by the nascent Hungarian film industry, Today and Tomorrow (1912). A period of directing films in Hungary was interrupted by a six-month stay in Denmark, where he starred in director August Bloom’s Atlantis (1913). Curtiz’s service in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I ended when he was wounded. He made fund-raising documentaries for the Red Cross and then returned to directing commercial films. By 1916, with many silent films to his credit, he had become one of Hungary’s most important directors. He left the country in 1919, however, after the communist government’s brief takeover of the film industry, and began working in Vienna, where his most important films were Sodom und Gomorrah (1922) and Moon of Israel (1924; Die Sklavenköenigin).