John Ford, original name John Martin Feeny, though he often claimed Sean Aloysius O’Feeney or O’Fearna   (born Feb. 1, 1895, Cape Elizabeth, Maine, U.S.—died Aug. 31, 1973, Palm Desert, Calif.) iconic American film director, best known today for his westerns, though none of the films that won him the Academy Award for best direction—The Informer (1935), The Grapes of Wrath (1940), How Green Was My Valley (1941), and The Quiet Man (1952)—was of this genre. His films, whether westerns or in other genres, are notable for a turn-of-the-20th-century ideal of American masculinity—loyal, self-deprecating yet competent, dependable in a scrap, bound by duty, courtly if somewhat tongue-tied with the ladies, with a winking fondness for alcohol but no patience for foul language or sloppy behaviour. Because of their popularity (as well as the continued popularity of many of the actors whose careers Ford helped spawn) and the skill he brought to their creation, his films had a powerful influence on Americans’ conception of their own history and values.
Ford was an Irish American and a New Englander, born to immigrant parents. He began his movie work in the silent era, serving as a jack-of-all-trades apprentice on many early pictures made by his actor-director brother Francis. By the end of the silents, Ford had directed more than 60 films (many “two-reelers” and a handful of films approaching what is now considered feature length), including dozens of westerns, often starring Harry Carey in the persona of “Cheyenne Harry,” a hard-drinking, often down-at-the-heels outlaw with a weakness for helping the defenseless. Ford proved able to satisfy the expectations of producers and audiences alike while adding small touches, whether gritty or sentimental, that gave his films an extra human dimension often lacking in the generic programmers of the day. He gambled with his reputation as an efficient, no-nonsense helmer-for-hire in the production of The Iron Horse (1924), his over-budget schedule-busting epic about the construction of the transcontinental railroad in the 1860s. Ford was pressured by the studio but allowed to finish, and the film became a huge financial and critical success, placing Ford in the Olympian company of predecessors D.W. Griffith and Cecil B. DeMille.