Silesia, Polish Śląsk, Czech Slezsko, German Schlesien,  historical region that is now in southwestern Poland. Silesia was originally a Polish province, which became a possession of the Bohemian crown in 1335, passed with that crown to the Austrian Habsburgs in 1526, and was taken by Prussia in 1742. In 1945, at the end of World War II, Silesia was one of the regions of German territory that was granted to Poland by the Soviet Union in compensation for land in eastern Poland that was incorporated into the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Silesia consists largely of the basin of the upper and middle Oder River, which flows from southeast to northwest. The region is bounded by the Sudeten mountains to the southwest, by the Beskid range to the south, and by the Kraków-Wieluń plateau to the northeast. Silesia is now divided principally into four Polish województwa (provinces): Lubuskie, Dolnośląskie, Opolskie, and Śląskie. The remainder of the historical region forms part of Brandenburg and Saxony Länder (states) of Germany and part of the Moravia-Silesia kraj (region) of the Czech Republic. The chief cities of the region are Wrocław and Katowice.
By the 9th century ce Silesia was exclusively inhabited by Slavic peoples: the Dziadoszanie and the Bobrzanie in the north and the Ślęzanie (from whom it got its name), the Opolanie, and the Golensicowie in the south. In the 10th century the Czech dynasty of the Přemyslids and the Polish dynasty of the Piasts contested the territory. Mieszko I, prince of Poland, was able to acquire the region from Boleslav II, prince of Bohemia, between 989 and 992. The Polish king Bolesław I consolidated this possession by founding a bishopric in 1000 with its seat first at Smogorzów and later at Wrocław. Following the death of the Polish king Bołeslaw III in 1138, a succession dispute arose that eventually resulted in Silesia’s being divided in 1163 into Lower (northwestern) and Upper (southeastern) Silesia, each ruled by a Piast prince. A third Silesian principality was created in 1203. The subsequent princes of Lower Silesia, Henry I and his son Henry II, tried without success to reunite the territory. In 1241 Henry II was killed in the Battle of Legnica (Liegnitz), in which his army of Polish and German knights halted an invasion of Mongols who had ravaged the country.