Tropical storm, organized centre of low pressure that originates over warm tropical oceans. The maximum sustained surface winds of tropical storms range from 63 to 118 km (39 to 73 miles) per hour. These storms represent an intermediate stage between loosely organized tropical depressions and more intense tropical cyclones, which are also called hurricanes or typhoons in different parts of the globe. A tropical storm may occur in any of Earth’s ocean basins in which tropical cyclones are found (North Atlantic, northeast Pacific, central Pacific, northwest and southwest Pacific, and Indian). The size and structure of tropical storms are similar to those of the more intense and mature tropical cyclones; they possess horizontal dimensions of about 160 km (100 miles) and winds that are highest at the surface but decrease with altitude. The winds typically attain their maximum intensity at approximately 30–50 km (20–30 miles) away from the centre of the circulation, but the distinct eyewall that is a characteristic of mature tropical cyclones is usually absent.
The precursors of tropical storms in the Atlantic are easterly waves that form over Africa and propagate toward the west. The easterly waves are characterized by wind speeds of approximately 16 km (10 miles) per hour and convective clouds that are loosely organized around a central area of low pressure, or trough axis. The winds transfer heat and moisture from the sea surface to the atmosphere. If local atmospheric conditions support deep convection and low vertical wind shear, the system may become organized and begin to intensify. Intensification occurs as the air warmed at the surface begins to rise. The transfer of air away from the centre of the trough axis causes the surface pressure to fall, which in turn causes higher winds that increase the transfer of heat at the surface. The Coriolis force, which is a product of Earth’s rotation, causes the winds to rotate about the centre, thereby generating a closed and symmetric circulation pattern.