French Foreign Legion, French Légion étrangère ,  an elite military force originally consisting of foreign volunteers in the pay of France but now comprising volunteer soldiers from any nation, including France, for service in France and abroad. Created as a temporary expedient in a French army that otherwise barred foreigners from serving in its ranks, the French Foreign Legion eventually gained a reputation as the world’s premier mercenary corps. For most of its history, the legion also maintained the exceptional status of being a voluntary unit in a conscript army. It lost this distinction when France abandoned conscription in the early 21st century, but it retained its elite status nevertheless. Today, with a strength of approximately 8,000 men, the Foreign Legion is one of the French army’s preferred units for overseas service. It saw action in the Persian Gulf War of 1990–91 and has since been sent often to Africa, as well as to Southeast Asia, the Balkans, and Afghanistan.
Men between the ages of 17 and 40, of any nationality, may join the legion. Recruits enlist under an assumed name—a requirement known as the anonymat—but a legionnaire may request to serve under his true name after a year of service. Although the legion shields every legionnaire’s privacy, each prospective recruit is thoroughly interrogated to discover his motivation for joining the legion and to determine whether he has a criminal background. Those who have had minor scrapes with the law are acceptable—even preferred—as they are assumed to be more willing to turn their backs on their former lives and fully integrate into life in the legion; serious criminals, however, are unwelcome. Recruitment patterns reflect the political turmoil of the time. However, care is taken to have a mix of nationalities. Legionnaires of European descent predominate, and Frenchmen remain well represented in the ranks, either because they seek to belong to an elite corps of the French army or because a criminal record makes them ineligible for service in regular French units. Some foreigners enlist in the hope of gaining French citizenship, for which they are eligible at the completion of three years’ service.