Bomber, military aircraft designed to drop bombs on surface targets. Aerial bombardment can be traced to the Italo-Turkish War, in which early in December 1911 an Italian pilot on an observation mission reached over the side of his airplane and dropped four grenades on two Turkish targets. During World War I the Germans used their rigid airships, known as zeppelins, as strategic bombers in raids on England. These were soon replaced by faster biplanes, particularly the twin-engined Gotha G.IV and the huge, four-engined Staaken R.VI, which carried two tons of bombs. Bomber airplanes were soon developed by the other major combatant nations. Tactical bombing was carried out on the battlefield by smaller aircraft such as the French Voisin, which carried some 130 pounds (60 kg) of small bombs that the observer simply picked up and dropped over the side.
Early bombers, being guided by crude nautical navigation techniques and carrying bombs in open racks, lacked the accuracy and bombloads to do extensive damage, but with the shift in the 1930s to faster, more powerful aircraft of all-metal, monoplane construction, air power began to assume an important role in warfare. The first new type to gain prominence was the dive bomber, which makes a steep dive toward the target before releasing its bombs. In Germany’s invasions of Poland and France early in World War II, the JU 87 (Stuka) dive bomber opened the way for German armoured columns by shattering enemy ground defenses and terrorizing civilians. Germany’s strategic bombing of Britain (1940) was conducted by its Junkers, Heinkel, and Dornier lines of bombers, while Britain relied at first on the Wellington and the Soviet Union began making its Tupolev bombers. These twin-engined medium bombers were superseded later in the war by four-engined heavy bombers, particularly the British Halifax and Lancaster and the U.S. B-17 Flying Fortress, B-24 Liberator, and B-29 Superfortress. Flying in streams hundreds of aircraft strong, these planes attacked railroad facilities, bridges, factories, and oil refineries and killed tens of thousands of civilians in firebombings of such cities as Dresden, Hamburg, and Tokyo (1944–45).