Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, large desert area in southwestern Arizona, U.S. It is situated along the Mexican border, its northern boundary about 15 miles (24 km) south of Ajo by road. The cities of Yuma (northwest) and Tucson (east-northeast) lie about 140 and 185 miles (225 and 300 km), respectively, from the monument. Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge adjoins the monument to the west and northwest, and the Tohono O’odham Indian Reservation bounds it to the east. Established in 1937, it was designated a biosphere reserve by UNESCO in 1976. The monument, with an area of 517 square miles (1,339 square km), preserves segments of the rugged Sonoran Desert. It is named for the organ-pipe cactus (Stenocereus thurberi), which is found in large stands in the United States only in this locality and is so called because its branches resemble organ pipes. Park headquarters and a visitor’s centre are located in the southeastern portion of the monument, about 5 miles (8 km) north of the border town (within the monument) of Lukeville.
The region’s landscape consists of several ranges of mountains and hills interspersed with broad and relatively flat valleys. The relief rises to its highest elevations in the Ajo Range along the eastern boundary, reaching 4,808 feet (1,465 metres) at Mount Ajo. A small, permanent, spring-fed pond is located at Quitobaquito in the southwest corner of the national monument; otherwise there are no perennial waterways. However, several intermittent streams within the boundaries can quickly become raging torrents during and after the often intense thunderstorms that occur during the summer monsoon period (July–September). Winters are cool and pleasant, with high temperatures in the 60s F (about 18 °C), lows of about 40 °F (4 °C), and frequent light rain showers. Springs and early summers are dry, with high temperatures climbing as the days progress toward summer. Summers are hot, and the air becomes more humid during the monsoon. High temperatures exceed 100 °F (38 °C) on most days from June through August.