Adipose cell, also called adipocyte or fat cell,  connective-tissue cell specialized to synthesize and contain large globules of fat. There are two types of adipose cells: white adipose cells contain large fat droplets, only a small amount of cytoplasm, and flattened, noncentrally located nuclei; and brown adipose cells contain fat droplets of differing size, a large amount of cytoplasm, numerous mitochondria, and round, centrally located nuclei. The chief chemical constituents of adipose cell fat are triglycerides, which are esters made up of a glycerol and one or more fatty acids, such as stearic, oleic, or palmitic acids. Enzymes contained in adipose cells specialize in the hydrolysis of triglycerides in order to generate fatty acids and glycerol for physiological processes. The fat stored in these cells in part comes directly from the fats eaten and in part is manufactured within the body from fats and carbohydrates in the food and sometimes from protein. The main reservoir of fat in the body is the adipose tissue beneath the skin, called the panniculus adiposus. There are also deposits of fat between the muscles, among the intestines and in their mesentery, around the heart, and elsewhere. One function of these deposits is to act as soft, elastic padding between the various organs.
Adipose tissue, which is in part made up of adipose cells, acts as a fuel reserve and helps conserve the heat of the body. In times of significant energy expenditure (e.g., exercise) or lack of adequate energy intake (e.g., fasting), adipose cells secrete fatty acids, which can be used by muscles and other tissues as a source of energy. Fatty acids generated by brown adipose cells generally are not secreted; instead, they are used by the cells’ mitochondria in order to generate heat (thermogenesis), particularly in hibernating animals and human infants. Adipose cells also synthesize and secrete complex fatty acid substances called prostanoids (e.g., prostaglandins), which have various hormonelike actions such as inhibiting the breakdown of fat, and a protein hormone called leptin, which plays a role in the regulation of metabolism, body weight, and reproductive function. Adipose cells also express receptors capable of binding specific steroid hormones that can signal for increased storage of fat or increased release of fatty acids. Substances secreted but not synthesized by adipose cells include cholesterol and retinol (vitamin A).