Highland, council area in northern Scotland, forming the northernmost extension of the Scottish mainland between the Atlantic Ocean in the west and the North Sea in the east. It extends from the northern Grampian Mountains in the south to the Pentland Firth (which separates it from the Orkney Islands) in the north, and it includes several islands of the Inner Hebrides, including Skye and the Small Islands. It encompasses the historic counties of Caithness, Sutherland, and Nairnshire, the historic region of Ross and Cromarty, the historic county of Inverness-shire (except for the parts of Ross and Cromarty and Inverness-shire that lie in the Outer Hebrides), and parts of the historic counties of Moray and Argyllshire. The Highland council area comprises the northern portion of the Scottish Highlands. Highland, the largest administrative unit in the United Kingdom, covers nearly one-third of Scotland’s total area, but, with less than one-twentieth of Scotland’s population, it has the lowest population density in the United Kingdom. Inverness is the council area’s administrative centre.
The area’s rugged landscape consists of a plateau deeply dissected by glacier-scoured valleys, many of them containing lochs (lakes). The largest valley is Glen Mor (the name means “Great Valley” in Gaelic), partly occupied by Loch Ness. Several mountain ranges, including the Cairngorm Mountains and Cuillin Hills, rise above the level of the plateau, with elevations exceeding 3,000 feet (900 metres). The Highland area includes the highest point in the United Kingdom, Ben Nevis, with an elevation of 4,406 feet (1,343 metres). The plateau terminates in sheer cliffs along much of the coastline, which is indented by deep sea inlets, generally known as firths along the North Sea coast (including Dornoch Firth and Cromarty Firth) and as sea lochs along the Atlantic coast (such as Loch Broom and Loch Linnhe). The Highland council area is one of the wettest parts of the United Kingdom. The highest peaks can receive as much as 200 inches (5,100 mm) of precipitation per year, and average annual precipitation exceeds 60 inches (1,500 mm) in the western hills and along much of the Atlantic coast. The North Sea coast is drier, with average annual precipitation of about 30 inches (750 mm). The moderating influence of the surrounding seas produces a mild climate. Winters are warm for the latitude, with January temperatures averaging above freezing except in the mountains of the interior, and summers are cool, with temperatures seldom rising above 68 °F (20 °C).